
               **How to make stemming algorithms**

Our hope is that by open sourcing stemming algorithms for English, French,
Spanish, Italian, Portuguese, German and Dutch, we can encourage the
development of similar algorithms for other languages. A stemming algorithm
for Russian we hope to release shortly, but we lack algorithms for Finnish,
the Scandanavian languages, Czech, Polish, etc.

*What is a stemming algorithm?

It is important to realise the stemming is a process intended to improve the
performance of IR systems. It is not an exercise in etymology or grammar. In
fact from an etymological or grammatical viewpoint, a stemming algorithm is
liable to make many mistakes. In addition, stemming algorithms - at least the
ones presented here - are applicable to the written, not the spoken, form of
the language.

A stemming algorithm is a process of linguistic normalisation, in which the
variant forms of a word are reduced to a common form, for example,

    connection
    connections
    connective          --->   connect
    connected
    connecting

For many of the world's languages, Chinese and Japanese for example, this
concept is irrelevant, but it is certainly meaningful for the many languages
of the Indo-European group. In these languages words tend to be constant at
the front, and to vary at the end:

                   -ion
                   -ions
            connect-ive
                   -ed
                   -ing

The variable part is the 'ending', or 'suffix'. Taking these endings off is
called 'suffix stripping' or 'stemming', and the residual part is called the
stem.

*Endings

Another way of looking at endings and suffixes is to think of the suffix as
being made up of a number of endings. For example, the French word

            confirmatives

can be thought of as 'confirm' with a chain of endings,

            -atif (adjectival ending - morphological)
    plus    -e    (feminine ending - grammatical)
    plus    -s    (plural ending - grammatical)

-atif can also be thought of as -ate plus -if. note that the addition of
endings can cause respellings, so -e changes preceding 'f' to 'v'.

Endings fall into two classes, grammatical and morphological. The addition of
-s in English to make a plural is an example of a grammatical ending. The
word remains of the same type. There is usually only one dictionary entry for
a word with all its various grammatical endings. Morphological endings create
new types of word. In English -ise or -ize makes verbs from nouns ('demon',
'demonise'), -ly makes adverbs from adjectives ('foolish', 'foolishly'), and
so on. Usually there are separate dictionary endings for these creations.

*Language knowledge

It is much easier to write a stemming algorithm for a language when you are
familiar with it. If you are not, you will need to work with someone who is,
and who can also explain details of grammar to you. Best is a professional
teacher or translator. You certainly don't need to have a world authority on
the grammar of the language. In fact too much expertise can get in the way
when it comes to the very practical matter of writing the stemming algorithm.

*Raw materials

A conventional grammar of a language will list all the grammatical endings,
and will often summarise most of the morphological endings. A grammar, plus a
dictionary, are therefore basic references in the devlopment of a stemming
algorithm, although you can dispense with them if you have an excellent
knowledge of the language. What you cannot dispense with is a vocabulary to
try the algorithm out on as it is being developed. Assemble about 2 megabytes
of text. A mix of sources is best, and literary prose (conventional novels)
usually gives an ideal mix of tenses, cases, persons, genders etc. Obviously
the texts should be in some sense 'contemporary', but it is an error to
exclude anything slightly old. The algorithm itself may well get applied to
older texts once it has been written. For English, the works of Shakespeare
in the customary modern spelling make a good test vocabulary.

>From the source text derive a control vocabulary of words in sorted order.
Sample vocabularies in this style are part of our Open Source release. If you
make a small change to the stemming algorithm you should have a procedure
that presents the change as a three column table: column one is the control
vocabulary, column 2 the stemmed equivalent, and column 3 the stemmed
equivalent after the change has been made to the algorithm. The effects of
the change can be evaluated by looking at the differences between columns two
and three.

The first job is to come up with a list of endings. This can be done by
referring to the grammar, the dictionary, and also by browsing through the
control vocabulary.

*Rules for removing endings

If a word has an ending, E, when should E be removed? Various criteria come
into play here. One is the knowledge we have about the word from other
endings that might have been removed. If a word ends with a grammatical verb
ending, and that has been removed, then we have a verb form, and the only
further endings to consider are morphological endings that create verbs from
other word types. At this level the system of endings gives rise to a small
state table, which can be followed in devising the algorithm. In Latin
derived languages, there is a state table of morphological endings that
roughly looks like this:

   -IC (adj) -> -ATION (noun)
                -ITY (noun)
                -MENT (adv)
                -AT (verb)     ->   -IV (adj)    ->   -ITY (noun)
                                                 ->   -MENT (adv)
                               ->   -OR (noun)
 -ABLE (adj) -> -ITY (noun)
                -MENT (adv)

  -OUS (adj) -> -MENT (adv)

The ending forms take different values in different languages. In French, -OR
becomes '-eur' (m.) or '-rice' (f.), -AT disappears into the inifinitive form
of a verb. In English, -MENT becomes '-ly', and then one can recognise,

   -IC-ATION   fortification
   -IC-ITY     electricity
   -IC-MENT    fantastically
   -AT-IV      contemplative
   -AT-OR      conspirator
   -IV-ITY     relativity
   -IV-MENT    instictively
   -ABLE-ITY   incapability
   -ABLE-MENT  charitably
   -OUS-MENT   famously

Trios, -IC-AT-IV etc., also occur, but sequences of length four,
-IC-AT-IV-ITY and -IC-AT-IV-MENT, are absent, (or occur very rarely).

Sometimes the validity of an ending depends on the immediately preceding
group of letters. In Italian, for example, certain pronouns and pronoun
groups attach to present participle and infinitive forms of verbs, for
example,

    scrivendole = scrivendo (writing) + le (to her)
    mandarglielo = mandare (to give) + glielo (it to him)

If E is the ending, the possible forms are -andoE, -endoE, -arE, -erE, -irE,
so E is removed in the context -Xndo or Yr, where X is a or e, and Y is a or
e or i. See the attached_pronoun procedure in the Italian stemmer.

The most useful criterion for removing an ending, however, is to base the
decision on the syllable length of the stem that will remain. This idea was
first used in the English stemming algorithm, and has been found to be
applicable in the other stemming algorithms too. If C stands for a sequence
of consonants, and V for a sequence of vowels, any word can be analysed as,

        [C] V C ... V C [V]

where [..] indicates arbitrary presence, and (V C)n means V C repeated n
times. We can find successive positions 0, 1, 2 ... in a word corresponding
to each vowel-consonant stretch V C,

        t h u n d e r s t r i c k e n
           0     1         2     3   4

The closer E is to the beginning of the word, the more unwilling we should be
remove it. So we might have a rule to remove E if at is after position 2, and
so on.

*Developing the algorithm

Build the algorithm up bit by bit, trying out a small number of ending
removals at a time. For each new ending plus rule added, decide whether, on
average, the stemming process is improved or degraded. If it is degraded the
rule is unhelpful and can be discarded.

This sounds like common sense, but it is actually very easy to fall into the
trap of endlessly elaborating the rules without looking at their true effect.
What you find eventually is that you can be improving performance in one area
of the vocabulary, while causing a similar degradation of performance in
another area. When this happens consistently it is time to call a halt to
development and to regard the stemming algorithm as finished.

It is important to realise that the stemming process cannot be made perfect.
For example, in French, the simple verb endings -ons and -ent of the present
tense occur repeatedly in other contexts. -ons is the plural form of all nouns
ending -on, and -ent is also a common noun ending. On balance it is best not
to remove these endings. In practice this affects -ent verb endings more than
-ons verb endings, since -ent endings are commoner. The result is that verbs
stem not to a single form, but to a much smaller number of forms (three),
among which the form given by the true stem of the verb is by far the
commonest.

If we define errors A and B by,

    error A: removing an ending when it is not an ending
    error B: not removing an ending when it is an ending

Then removing -ent leads to error A; not removing -ent leads to error B. We
must adopt the rule that minimises the number of errors - not the rule that
appears to be the most elegant.

*Irregular forms

Linguistic irregularities slip through the net of a stemming algorithm. The
English stemmer stems 'cows'to 'cow', but does not stem 'oxen' to 'ox'. In
reality this matters much less than one might suppose. In English, the
irregular plurals tend to be of things that were common in Anglo-Saxon
England: oxen, sheep, mice, dice - and lice. Men, women and children are of
course common today, but the very commonness of these words makes them of
less importance in IR systems. Similar remarks may be said about irregular
verbs in English, the total number of which is around 150. Here, the fact
that verbs are used perhaps rather less than nouns and adjectives in IR
queries helps account for the unimportance of verb irregularities in IR
performance. There are in English more significant irregularities in
morphological changes such as 'receive' to 'reception', 'decide' to
'decision' etc., which correspond, ultimately, to irregularities in the Latin
verbs from which these words derive. But again working IR systems are rarely
upset by lack of resolution of these forms.

An irregularity of English which does cause a problem is the word 'news'. It
is now a singular noun, and is never regarded as the plural of 'new'. This,
and a few more howlers, are placed in a table, irregular_forms, in the
English stemming algorithm. Similar tables are provided in the other stemming
algorithms, with some provisional entries. The non-English stemming
algorithms have not been used enough for a significant list of irregular
forms to emerge, but as they do, they can be placed in the irregular_forms
table.

*Stopwords

It has been traditional in setting up IR systems to discard the very
commonest words of a language - the stopwords. This practise is not
necessarily being encouraged here, but if it is done, it connects in various
ways with the stemming algorithm:

The stemming algorithm can itself be used to detect and remove stopwords. One
would add into the irregular_forms table something like this,

   "", /* null string */

   "am/is/are/be/being/been/"    /* BE */
   "have/has/having/had/"        /* HAD */
   "do/does/doing/did/"          /* DID */
   ...                           /* multi-line string */

so that the words 'am', 'is' etc. map to the null string (or some other
easily recognised value).

Alternatively, stopwords could be removed before the stemming algorithm is
applied, or after the stemming algorithm is applied. In this latter case, the
words to be removed must themselves have gone through the stemmer, and the
number of distinct forms will be greatly reduced as a result. In italian for
example, the four forms

    questa     queste    questi    questo

(meaning 'that') all stem to

    quest

*Compound words

The problem of splitting up compound words is entirely separate, and should
be done prior to stemming, if it is done at all.


